An Early Trial of Euro: Central

Bank of West African States

Mustafa BOYDAŞ Economics 4 Year Student th

European Monetary Union is most well-known monetary union in the World. However, it is not the only one. What if we say that there is another monetary union in the middle of Africa with a common central bank called BCEAO (Central Bank of West Africa)? The Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO) is a central bank and therefore the supranational monetary authority for the eight member states of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), named as Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo. BCEAO headquarters is located in Dakar, the capital city of Senegal. The BCEAO issues the West African CFA franc (XOF), a currency pegged to the euro, as the only issuer of the West African CFA franc, and it is responsible for conducting the monetary policy of XOF, ensuring financial stability, and managing the FX reserves of the union.

Historical Background

We can consider that behind the BCEAO, there is a rich history about colonialism and the geopolitics of Africa, and to fully understand the sophisticated sides of the new Eco currency, it is essential to look at the history of the monetary authority in the region, the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO). The story started with the CFA franc in 1945. On 26th December of 1945, the CFA franc was created. Initially, CFA was the abbreviation of the Colonies françaises d'Afrique (French Colonies of Africa). On 12th May 1962, Banque centrale des États de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (Central Bank of West African States) was founded as a supranational central bank of 8 member countries.

Arda AKGÜL Economics/BA 3 Year Student rd

At the same time, the West African Monetary Union (WAMU) was founded with the same member countries as well, yet Guinea-Bissau joined much later (1997), and Mauritania was originally in the union but left in 1973; Mali also left in 1962 and rejoined in 1984. After the foundation of WAMU, the name of their currency changed to Communauté Financière Africaine (African Financial Community). Besides the WAMU, in 1994 the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) was founded to provide fiscal discipline, convergence, and regulatory union between WAMU countries, and its institutional evolution offers insights for the ECOWAS integration proposal. While the currency was managed from Paris in its early history, the 1970s witnessed a significant shift to Africanization. This shift happened during the term of the first African governor, Abdoulaye Fadiga, in 1975 and the relocation of the bank's headquarters from Paris to Dakar, Senegal, in 1978.

BCEAO Headquarters, Dakkar/Senegal

Source: MIT Library

Despite these administrative changes, the currency continued to be pegged to the French franc. The

rate was 50 CFA francs to 1 French franc. As narrated in the Future Plans section of this work, as of

2025, the withdrawal of Mali, Burkina Faso, and Niger from ECOWAS to form the Alliance of Sahel States

(AES) has made ECOWAS's plans delayed.

Similarities with ECB

The BCEAO is described as an "early trial" of the Euro in terms of the state coming from currency

union, however, similarities exist. Both are central banks that are above the countries, and they govern

a currency union of sovereign states. However, the differences show the distinct historical and

economic contexts of West Africa and Europe.

Feature European Central Bank (ECB)

Free Float (determined by

Exchange Rate Regime

markets).

Decentralized (held by National

Reserve Management

Central Banks).

The ECB acts for the banking

Lender of Last Resort

system.

External Guarantee None.

Future Plans

The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which was introduced in Lagos in 1975

and has member countries in 15 West African countries, is currently working on the idea of an ECO

currency. However, the vision of a unified currency may struggle as of 2025 due to Burkina Faso, Mali,

and Niger because of their withdrawal from ECOWAS to form the Alliance of Sahel States (AES). These

nations have rejected both the CFA franc and the proposed fiat money, the eco, and instead, they

proposed a resource-backed model anchored in gold, uranium, and oil. This effectively splits the

region into three competing monetary ideologies: the ECOWAS (fiat money Eco), the AES bloc

(commodity-backed), and the status quo CFA zone. While ECOWAS maintains a 2027 launch target, the

combination of missed convergence criteria and this new disparity shows that timeline is highly

unrealistic.

Central Bank of West African

States (BCEAO)

Fixed Peg (to the Euro).

Historically Centralized

(Operations Account).

The French Treasury acted as an

external guarantor for FX reserves

for the pre-2021 period.

French Treasury Guarantee

(Unlimited Convertibility).

The flags of the countries of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Commission

Conclusion and Suggestions

Apparently, a well-functioning economy comes with political stability. However, as we should look at

the structure specifically, it is important to define BCEAO’s path.

Firstly, most of the West African countries, including WAEMU countries also, are suffering from

different types of political instabilities. Military coups in Burkina Faso and Mali are two of the many

examples. In this environment, a common central bank, monetary policy, and currency could be

beneficial for WAEMU countries in providing independence of institutions. However, the decisions of

BCEAO are not separate from the union countries themselves. In other words, the political instabilities

of these countries are still affecting the BCEAO’s decisions whether there is an independent central

bank or not. Therefore, there could be a risk of penalizing stable countries of the union also. Moreover,

there are not homogeneous economies inside the WAEMU. They are all different in terms of inflation,

fiscal policy and etc. As a result, the ideal monetary policy could differ. However, due to the common

monetary policy for each country by BCEAO, the effects of the monetary policy change for every

country.

(Data Source: BCEAO*) *Burkina Faso’s inflation data is missing for the years of 2022 and 2023. Therefore, we use the same value of 2021 for these years.

Source: BCEAO

Besides, the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO) is an institution that could be divided into

two eras. It was designed to connect West Africa colonies to France. Through the reforms of 1975 and

the leadership of Abdoulaye Fadiga, it attempted to localize this relationship, moving its headquarter

to Dakar and its strategy toward African development. Today, however, the BCEAO faces an existential

problems. First group is AES, the alliance demand a total sovereignity from France and a currency

based on African resources such as Gold and Uranium. Second group is ECOWAS, who demand a

merger with the volatile Western African economy under the Eco, and the group who demand stability

as they fear from the hyperinflation of the WAMZ and prefer the safety of the Euro peg.

Suggestions can be using the AES narrative without embracing volatility, so the BCEAO should

consider moving from a strict Euro peg to a basket peg, for instance, a basket that contains Euro,

Dollar and Yuan. A final step of maturity of this localization step would be for the BCEAO to build

sufficient reserves to redo the French guarantee entirely, as it can transform the BCEAO into a truly

independent central bank like any central bank.

The "Early Trial of the Euro" in Africa has proven that a monetary union could survive for decades

among developing nations. Whether it can survive the disparities in African geopolitical sovereignty is

the defining question of the region.

References:

Bhatia, R. J. (1985). The West African Monetary Union: An analytical review (Occasional Paper No. 35). International Monetary Fund. https://doi.org/10.5089/9781616351083.084

Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO). (2025, May 19). History of the CFA franc. https://www.bceao.int/en/content/history-cfa-franc

Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO). (2025, May 19). Presentation of BCEAO. https://www.bceao.int/en/content/presentation-bceao

Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO). (2025, May 19). Presentation of WAMU. https://www.bceao.int/en/content/presentation-wamu

Economic Community of West African States. (n.d.). Member states. https://www.ecowas.int/member-states/

Economic Community of West African States. (n.d.). News. https://www.ecowas.int/c/news/

Ibrahim, G. (2020, April 1). Franc CFA'dan ECO'ya Afrika'da Para Birimi Tartışmaları [Currency discussions in Africa from Franc CFA to ECO]. ORDAF. https://ordaf.org/franc-cfadan-ecoya-afrikada-para-birimitartismalari/

Masson, P., & Pattillo, C. (2001). Monetary union in West Africa (ECOWAS): Is it desirable and how could it be achieved? (Occasional Paper No. 204). International Monetary Fund.

Nchadze, L. E. (2019, February 7). The populists are right – How the Franc CFA impoverishes Africa. On Policy Africa. https://onpolicy.org/the-populists-are-right-how-the-franc-cfa-impoverishes-africa/

UMOA-Titres. (2021, August). Information note of WAEMU area. https://www.umoatitres.org/wpcontent/uploads/2022/03/Information-Note-of-WAEMU-area_2021.pdf
