Climate Change and Sustainability with Sultan Tepe

Arda AKGÜL

Economics/Business Administration 3 Grade Student rd

Sultan Tepe, the board member and Head of Platform of Sustainability of Istanbul Chamber of Industry, was the guest of GreenTalks, a RadioTEDU podcast that has been prepared with TEDU Economic Research Union.

Podcast Hosts, Ezgi Eylem Erdoğan and Arda Akgül, asked questions on sustainability, the reflection of sustainability steps in industry and how it can be applied, especially in industry in Türkiye.

"IT IS HARMFUL TO THE WORLD

THAT CAUSED BY COMPLEX

INDUSTRY"

Ms. Tepe defined climate change as a change in the environment, atmosphere, weather events and where we live. However, she stated that the climate change we are currently experiencing has not happened naturally; it is caused by humans, which started with the Industrial Revolution that caused the greenhouse effect. It is harmful to the World which caused by complex industry", she said.And sustainability, which is meeting current needs without compromising future generation’s needs, term is about 60 years old, which was offered by scientists to the United Nations as they questioned the state of the World, Ms. Tepe said.

As Ms. Tepe also stated, when it comes to

Türkiye, the definition of sustainability is

"producing for the World without

consuming the World". According to Ms.

Tepe, climate change will be a problem, as

she also said that COP conferences have

high importance for the World. It would

also cause migration, as well as it can affect

around 45 countries that have not caused

the climate change but will be affected as

ice caps melt at both Poles due to the

Industrial Revolution and its consequences.

According to Ms. Tepe, it is not possible to

keep temperature at 3C° level, as we

already have reached 1.5 C°, which can

cause drought, hunger and epidemics as

microorganisms due to melted ice caps.

"DANGER BROUGHT BY INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION HAS NOT BEEN REALIZED."

Ms. Tepe stated that the Industrial

Revolution is not a bad thing as it leveraged

the welfare level of humanity, but the

danger that was brought by climate change

has not been realized. "Most probably, your

children will be living the consequences of

climate change," she said, "we all have to

be aware of the problem and take

measures".

"GREEN DEAL IS A ROAD MAP TO CARBON NEUTRAL."

To bring carbon neutralization to the

European Union, it is needed to make

imported products carbon neutral too.

Discussing the European Green Deal,

Ms. Tepe explained that this initiative

mandates carbon neutrality for all

products sold in Europe, a shift that

interests industries worldwide,

including those in Türkiye, to adopt

greener practices. “To bring carbon

neutralization to the European Union, it

is needed to make imported products

carbon-neutral too,” she said, as she

highlighted the impact of these

regulations on global trade.

Through her insights, Ms. Tepe also

highlighted that addressing climate

change requires not only technological

innovation but also a deep shift in

societal attitudes, as we could consider

it an urgent call for everyone to commit

to a more sustainable future.

As TED University Economics Research Union, we would like to express our gratitude to

Sultan Tepe.

Make sure that you’re subscribed to TED University Economics Research Union’s YouTube Channel to be notified with new episodes!

Ms. Tepe’s insights would serve as a

powerful reminder of the urgent need

for both technological innovation and a

fundamental shift in our societal

mindset. As industries and governments

strive to achieve a sustainable future,

Ms. Tepe’s message calls that

combating climate change is not solely

a policy challenge but a call for personal

and collective responsibility. Embracing

sustainability, both in theory and

practice, is highly important to protect

our planet and ensure a good future for

future generations.

youtube.com/@TEDUERU

instagram.com/erutedu
