Gazi Mustafa Kemal's Program

of Populism* with Dr. Serdar

Şahinkaya

Arda AKGÜL Economics/BA 3 Grade Student rd

In the third episode of the FieldTalks podcast series on RadioTEDU, Ezgi Eylem Erdoğan and Arda Akgül had a deep conversation with academician and author Dr. Serdar Şahinkaya about the Republic's early development vision, its populist program, and the forgotten Women's Congress. Dr. Şahinkaya, born in İzmir in 1958, is a graduate of Ankara University's Faculty of Political Sciences (Mülkiye) Economics Department, where he taught for 24 years.

He retired as an economics expert from the Türkiye Kalkınma Bankası (Development Bank of Türkiye) in 2019 and currently serves as the coordinator of the 21st Century Planning Group, also writing columns.

We recalled the important events in Türkiye’s economic transformation. This program, shaped under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, laid the foundation not only for economic but also for social and cultural transformation.

*Populism is one of the Atatürk’s Six Arrow’s policies. Others are republicanism, nationalism, secularism, statism, and reformism. youtube.com/@TEDUERU

instagram.com/erutedu

The Economic Story of a Nation: The Izmir Economic Congress

Dr. Şahinkaya explains that the Economic

Congress, held in İzmir from February 17 to

March 4, 1923, was proposed by the young

Economics Deputy Mahmut Esat Bey and

approved by Gazi Mustafa Kemal Paşa, then

Speaker of the Grand National Assembly.

The congress aimed to define the economic

model for the newly established state,

which had already been decided as a

populist government led by the People's

Party. Just five months after the end of the

War of Independence, it was deemed

crucial to gather insights from all

productive and creative forces of the time.

Over 16 days and 36 sessions, the İzmir

Economic Congress convened farmers,

merchants, industrialists, and workers,

ultimately adopting 302 resolutions

published as “Our Economic Principles” on

4 March 1923. A month later, Mustafa

Kemal Paşa distilled these into the

Republican People’s Party’s famous Nine

Principles. The decisions, described by Dr.

Şahinkaya as quite progressive for their

time, shaped early Republican politics,

encouraging a bank-focused development

drive that led to the establishment of İş

Bankası (1924), later Sümerbank and

Etibank, while also advocating workers'

rights such as the eight-hour workday, May

1 as Labor Day, and breastfeeding breaks

for women.

Evolution and Deviation from the Original Vision

Dr. Şahinkaya traces an erosion of the

early-Republic economic vision after the

late 1930s, the 1938 Economic State

Enterprises Law intensified state-led

development, WWII strained but did not

stop progress thanks to Türkiye’s

neutrality and 1930s industrial capacity, yet

post-1950 governments steadily abandoned

public-driven industrialization. The 1960

coup and 1961 Constitution briefly revived

the original principles, recovery of

economic autonomy, a Constitutional

Court, and comprehensive economic

planning, anchoring four successive

development plans that kept

industrialization at the economy’s core

through the 1970s.

Delegates attending the Izmir Economic

Congress in front of a promotional

exhibition.

Atatürk's Economic Foresight Advices

Dr. Şahinkaya underscores Atatürk’s

prescient economic vision, having

“Statism” in 1932 and “Guided Economy” in

1935, concepts later praised by scholars

such as Ha-Joon Chang, then argues that

the notion of “development” has been

hollowed out over the past 45 years,

reduced to import-driven growth detached

from social welfare. Since the 1980s,

comprehensive national planning has given

way to corporate-style “strategic plans,”

prompting his call for a renewed, genuinely

developmental strategy to “re-make this

geography a homeland.”

Women Congress

The Women Congress, held in Izmir on

February 2, 1923, and attended and

supported by Mustafa Kemal Pasha, was

groundbreaking in a society where women

were almost invisible. Mustafa Kemal, who

said, "All the works you see in the world

belong to women" and addressed both

genders equally as "Efendiler", signaled that

the coming Republic era would also be a

women's revolution by claiming that

women would be equal to men in science

and knowledge. This progressive spirit

continued when women gained the right to

vote in local elections in 1930 and the right

to vote and stand as candidates in

parliament in 1934.

Dr. Şahinkaya encourages aspiring

economists to read in a wide range,

especially in economic history, sociology,

and law, while taking handwritten notes

and keeping a journal to sharpen their

thinking. He advocates for primary sources,

such as the 1934 Industrial Plan, warns

against superficial, only numbers analysis,

and insists that rigorous quantitative work

be balanced with human context. Staying

informed through quality journalism,

developing original thinking rather than

relying on AI shortcuts, and proudly

identifying as an “economist” are key

pieces of advice.

Dr. Şahinkaya at RadioTEDU Studios.

youtube.com/@TEDUERU

instagram.com/erutedu

Ezgi Eylem Erdoğan, Dr. Şahinkaya and Arda Akgül

after the podcast.

As the TED University Economics Research Union, we’d like to thank dear Dr. Şahinkaya

for the precious conversation.

Make sure that you’re subscribed to TED University Economics Research Union’s YouTube Channel to be notified with new episodes! youtube.com/@TEDUERU

He also recommends taking

graduate studies at a variety of

institutions to gain a variety of

perspectives, first exploring the full

spectrum of economics and then

specializing deeply in a chosen

area.

Dr. Şahinkaya concludes with a

hopeful message for the youth,

emphasizing the importance of

spending years while being a

student wisely through meaningful

reading and building strong

networks to shape a positive future.

instagram.com/erutedu
