Trade War: Is It a Winnable or Losing War for the United

States?

Mehmet Orkun APAYDIN Economics 4 Grade Student th

On 2 April 2025, the president of the US, Donald Trump, had a quite interesting and remarkable Liberation Day speech in terms of global trade, and he stated that by imposing tariffs on the rest of the world, the US would demolish the free trade. The protectionist policies of Donald Trump shocked the world and hit global trade, even trade with alliances of the US. Tariff rates are all around the world, but some countries mark with high tariff rates, one of them, China, lastly by imposing a 245% tariff rate on goods imported from China, which are mostly rare elements used in the production of highindustry goods. Lastly, on 12 May 2025, Trump announced that the US agreed with China to decrease tariffs to 55 percent, even though there are claims about abusing the agreement. The question is whether these policies can harm China deeply or can offer new chances to increase trade. China is one of the biggest trade partners of the US and has a high share in trade and high-industry goods. Furthermore, other high tariff rates, mostly to ASEAN countries, can be a chance for China to increase regional trade and cooperation in Asia.

Furthermore, agreement with Japan and South Korea to increase trade share and cooperation is considerable for China to hold its place in world trade in that region. In that region, strengthening these partnerships could enhance China's influence and economic stability, allowing it to better navigate global trade challenges. Additionally, fostering closer ties with neighboring countries can lead to increased investment opportunities and collaborative innovation in various industries.

Europe is another side of this potential chance for China; the European Union is faced with considerable tariff rates by the Trump administration even though there are negotiation chances. Now, in addition to Asia, China can increase trade share with the European Union, which has disagreements with the US on political issues like the Russia- Ukraine war or intervention in German elections during the campaign process; Europeans can substitute US goods like Tesla electric cars with Chinese goods like BYD electric cars.

A fun critique of Trump's tariffs

Even though there exists unpredictability and harmful effects, China can gain more than it can lose. Lastly, these policies by the US can deepen trade between China and Russia that is embosomed by embargoes by the US and Europe. Even though the US and China agreed on a trade deal that includes a 55 percent tariffs on Chinese goods and a 10 percent tariff rate on US goods, aggression and unpredictability risks in trade policies can have more harmful impacts for the US in the long run with possible interior problems. One of the potential problems is a rise in inflation; the consumers can face high prices in the market due to tariffs in the future and Donald Trump’s disagreement with Chairman Powell about expanding monetary policy, declining the interest rates, and increasing money supply. While the money supply which is M2, has had a decreasing trend since May 2025 in the US, in the last meeting, the FED kept the Federal Funds Rate between 4.25 - 4.5 even though Donald Trump opposes this policy. The remaining attitudes of Donald Trump intended for expansionary monetary policy can be complementary for the impacts of the trade war on the US economy in terms of inflation.

Donald Trump is holding reciprocal tariff rates.

Another one is a potential decline in competition, it can be seen as an advantage for firms, especially for incumbents in the short run in the US, but it can result in a fall in productivity in the long run and according to Professor Ufuk Akçiğit, firm competition which is seen from firm entry-exit data, is likely to decrease in the US and Pola Lehmann embraces anti-growth policies rises for G7 countries, the US is a member of the G7, so these developments can deepen the impacts of the trade war for the US. Before the end, by remaining aggression in policies and unpredictability, the US can be faced with harmful outcomes in the long run, which Donald Trump assumed for China by imposing tariffs even though they agreed on a trade deal.

Reference: Aratani, L., & Smith, D. (2025, April 4). Trump announces sweeping new tariffs, upending decades of US trade policy. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/apr/02/trump-new-tariffs-liberation-day

Parikh, T. (2025, June 15). The rising resistance to creative destruction. Financial Times. https://www.ft.com/content/4c1abb2a-f710-4aa3-80ac-d8811abad84f?

Reuters. (2025, March 30). South Korea, China, Japan agree to promote regional trade as Trump tariffs loom. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/south-korea-china-japan-agree-promote-regional-trade-trump-tariffs-loom- 2025-03-30/

M2. (2025, June 24). https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/WM2NS#

US-China trade deal is “done,” Trump says. (n.d.). https://www.aa.com.tr/en/americas/us-china-trade-deal-is-done-trumpsays/3594268

Zahn, M. (2025, May 30). Trump claims China “totally violated” trade agreement with US. ABC News. https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/trump-claims-china-totally-violated-trade-agreement-us/story?id=122342782

(Reuters: Carlos Barria)
