Transportation and Infrastructure From An R&D

And Innovation Perspective

Sıla KHADAROO

Economics 2 Year Student nd

Despite enormous literature on R&D activities and innovations, the role of transportation and innovation is still to be examined. Recent studies show that highspeed rails (HSR), subways, and highways all have a substantial effect on R&D activities and innovations.

To discuss an example, we can look at China and their HSR. With over 45,000 km of operational rails, China has the most operational train transportation system globally. A contemporary study by Zhang and Cui (2025) points out that HSR lines improve resource allocation through increased labor flexibility, as workers have a better opportunity to be matched with a more suitable job. This leads to firms having increased human capital, which contributes to increased R&D investments. Another key finding is that HSR creates more efficient financial systems by making it easier for banks, firms, and investors to meet together and so acquire credit approvals needed for producing innovative outputs.

Previous studies present two main ways that transportation and infrastructure influence innovation. The first way is knowledgespillovers. These spillovers come from the fact that when people are able to transport between areas, they also transport ideas, which comes back in a much more enhanced and developed style. This brings forth cooperation between firms and increases their room for innovation. The second way is decreased travel expenses. With reductions in cost, people have a greater chance of mobility, which once again contributes to cooperation and, hence, additional output (Zhang & Cui, 2025). One more noteworthy point is that the demand for innovation can raise when railway systems merge internal and external markets through trade (Donaldson & Hornbeck, 2016).

We may continue once again with China, this time by referring to the work of Li et al. (2025). Li et al. look at HSR together with subways. They find that there is an increase in technology spillovers from foreign R&D firms when there are HSR lines and subways. In similarity to HSR, subways also lower the distance between regional firms and R&D firms, consequently easing labor movements and increasing access to technology. Moreover, if the area has highquality institutions and therefore a better implementation of law and if the rate of competition is high, then the effect of HSR and subways on technology spillovers multiplies. We can note that this effect is greater in developing and high technology industries.

Li et al. (2025)

Li et al. (2025)

the same as for HSR and subways; there is increased innovation by firms as reaching knowledge is easier. Also, when there are more highways, firms can reduce their financial constraints to an important extent. Finally, it is known that there is a negative relationship between labor wage distortions and the level of innovation. Highways in this sense have the potential to reduce these distortions.

In conclusion, R&D activities and innovation are affected by transportation infrastructures such as high-speed rails, subways, and highways through various channels the two main ones being spillovers and cost reductions.

References: Donaldson, D., & Hornbeck, R. (2016). Railroads and American Economic Growth: A “Market Access” approach*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2), 799–858. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjw002

Li, L., Liu, B., Sheng, B., & Wang, T. (2025). “A tale of two rails”: Transportation infrastructure and technological spillovers from R&D center foreign firms. China Economic Review, 90, 102367. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chieco.2025.102367

Mao, N., Sun, W., & Zhang, L. (2024). The innovation effects of transportation infrastructure: Evidence from highways in China. Economics of Transportation, 38, 100352. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecotra.2024.100352

Zhang, X., & Cui, T. (2025). Transportation Infrastructure and Innovation: Evidence from China’s High-Speed Railways. Sustainability, 17(22), 10004. https://doi.org/10.3390/su172210004

Lastly, we can examine the research of Mao et al. (2024), Mao et al. (2024), in difference to the other authors we have mentioned, focuses on Chinese highways instead of railways. They put forward several essential results. These results include the following: there is a positive relationship between highway construction and firm innovation. With each new highway, the patent applications by firms increase by more than 1.5%.

There is a 0.7% increase in firm applications for patents when one more highway intersects with another. When compared internationally, between countries with and without highways, firms in countries with highways increase their patent applications by nearly 4% when a new highway is available. Not so differently from our previously mentioned authors, they also look at the effect of knowledge

spillovers, constraints in financing, and additionally labor wage distortions. The effect of knowledge spillovers is
