Will AI Take My Job? A Literature Review on Employment and Automation

Risks

Mustafa BOYDAŞ

Economics 4 Grade Student th

In today’s world, AI is everywhere. It is so popular that we can see AI-generated outputs wherever we look. Different people use it for various purposes. While students are using AI for their projects and classes, including me, working people are using it for their jobs. Even people are chatting with them. This popularity brings some discussions and questions about AI as well. One of the biggest discussions about it is AI’s effects on unemployment. In other words, “Can AI take over my job?” I think it looks like a valid question when we look at the development speed of AI. Basically, AI is becoming better in every topic rapidly. Therefore, I also couldn’t resist my curiosity, and I checked the literature on that topic. In this paper, I have summarized the articles that I consider to be significant to the subject.

To satisfy my curiosity, the first paper that I looked at was an old paper that goes back to 1984. Nilsson (1984) argued the effects of AI on employment with the contributions of common opinions about that topic at that time. According to him, the development of AI is more radical than other automation technologies. Therefore, it could create unemployment risk, even though we managed to solve unemployment problems that came from previous automation technological developments. However, according to the paper, unemployment could have a liberating effect on people. In addition, he thought it was an early concern, and there were 1 or 2 generations to advance in that technology—of course, we should remember this paper was written in 1984.

(The title of this paper created by ChatGPT 4o)

In a more recent article, Acemoğlu and Restrepo (2019) focused on the concept of the wrong kind of AI. In that article, they are dividing AI technologies into two. The first one is automation-focused AI. With automation-focused AI, productivity can be increased. However, this increase can lead to a decrease in demand for labor. Consequently, AI replaces labor. On the other hand, reinstating AI can be used to create new jobs and tasks for labor. As a result, while we can preserve our labor, we can also increase productivity. In this paper, there are examples of how reinstating AI could create new tasks for humans too.

This photo generated by ChatGPT 4o.

In another paper, Georgieff and Hyee (2022) researched the relationship between AI and employment in 23 OECD countries. In that empirical study, they couldn’t find any clear relationship between AI exposure and employment growth. However, jobs with high levels of computer use experienced increased employment growth due to high exposure to AI. On the other hand, there is a negative relationship between AI and growth in average hours worked in occupations that have low computer use jobs. According to them, this result is about partial automation by AI boosting productivity and changing occupations to higher value-added tasks.

Source: UNCTAD calculations, based on Cazzaniga et al., 2024 and Gymrek et al., 2024. (Technology and Innovation Report 2025, UNCTAD)

Firstly, according to the OECD, Generative AI (GenAI) is a category of AI that can create new content such as text, images, videos, and music. In the figure above, advanced economies are affected more by AI due to the more complex jobs overall in these countries. There is a similar picture in GenAI as well. Workers with higher levels of education are more exposed to GenAI but also more likely to benefit. Therefore, the effects of GenAI and AI are different. In general, AI can be exposed to automation more than GenAI but also gives greater opportunities for augmentation.

While this relationship could be beneficial to highly skilled workers, it could harm low digitally skilled workers.

In the next one, the UN’s report named the 2025 Technology and Innovation Report was used. Of course, that report is too detailed; I only focused on AI exposure in that report. However, if you are interested in the topic, I strongly recommend reading the whole report. According to the report, AI exposure differs by the income of the countries. In the graph below you can see the changes in AI exposure and GenAI exposure in terms of the development level of economies.

In conclusion, AI’s rapid development can scare people about their job’s future. According to my literature review about the topic, there is a consensus about the risk of unemployment by AI between researchers as well. However, I think the situation is not that simple. Firstly, there are two types of AI. By reinstating AI, we can prevent unemployment, create new jobs, and still increase productivity. Besides, we can also increase our abilities, such as computer usage, and be protected against the unemployment risk that comes from AI. Moreover, the effects of AI exposure to augmentation and automation are different between economies. We should also consider this while we are making new policies to reduce the risk of AI takeover. As a result, there is a risk of losing our jobs due to AI exposure. However, we can also protect ourselves by following the literature. Besides, I think the jobs that are dangerous in terms of AI takeover will increase with the development of technology in the future. Therefore, to be protected against AI exposure, further research is needed. And who knows, maybe AI could be liberating, as Nilsson (1984) stated.

Reference

Acemoğlu, D., & Restrepo, P. (2019). The wrong kind of AI? Artificial intelligence and the future of labour demand. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1093/cjres/rsz022

Generative AI. (n.d.). OECD. https://www.oecd.org/en/topics/generative-ai.html

Georgieff, A., & Hyee, R. (2022). Artificial intelligence and employment: New cross-country evidence. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 5, Article 832736. https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2022.832736

Nilsson, N. J. (1984). Artificial intelligence, employment, and income. AI Magazine, 5(2), 5–14. https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v5i2.433

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. (2025). Technology and innovation report 2025: Inclusive artificial intelligence for development (UNCTAD/TIR/2025). United Nations. https://unctad.org/publication/technology-and-innovation-report-2025-inclusive-artificial-intelligencedevelopment
